C is a general-purpose programming language known for its efficiency, flexibility, and low-level capabilities. Developed in the early 1970s, C has become one of the most widely used programming languages and serves as a foundation for many other languages.

Key Features and Characteristics of C:

    Mid-Level Language: C strikes a balance between high-level languages (such as Python or Java) and low-level languages (like assembly or machine code). It provides high-level abstractions while allowing direct manipulation of memory and hardware.

    Efficiency and Performance: C is renowned for its efficiency in terms of memory usage and execution speed. It allows programmers to have fine-grained control over the code, making it suitable for systems programming, embedded systems, and performance-critical applications.

    Portability: C programs can be compiled and run on various platforms, including different operating systems and hardware architectures, with minimal modifications. This portability is achieved through the use of standard libraries and a well-defined language specification.

    Structured Programming: C supports structured programming principles, such as the use of functions, loops, and conditionals, which enhance code organization, readability, and maintainability.

    Pointers and Memory Management: C provides direct memory access through pointers, allowing efficient manipulation of data structures and dynamic memory allocation. However, manual memory management in C requires careful handling to avoid memory leaks and dangling pointers.

    Extensibility: C allows the integration of assembly language code and direct interaction with hardware, making it suitable for systems programming and developing operating systems, device drivers, and embedded systems.

    Large Standard Library: C has a rich standard library that provides a wide range of functions for input/output operations, string handling, mathematical calculations, memory allocation, and more. This library helps programmers accomplish common tasks without having to reinvent the wheel.

    Influence on Other Languages: Many modern programming languages, including C++, C#, Java, and Objective-C, have been influenced by C in terms of syntax, features, and programming paradigms.

Common Applications of C:

    Operating Systems: C is widely used for developing operating systems, kernels, and device drivers due to its low-level capabilities and direct access to hardware.

    Embedded Systems: C is a popular choice for programming embedded systems, such as microcontrollers and IoT devices, where efficiency, control, and direct hardware interaction are critical.

    System Software: Many system utilities, compilers, interpreters, and text editors are implemented in C due to its performance, low-level control, and portability.

    Game Development: C is used extensively in game development, particularly for performance-critical components such as graphics engines, physics simulations, and networking.

    Scientific and Numerical Computing: C is employed for scientific and numerical computations, as it provides efficient memory management, performance, and access to low-level operations.

Learning C:

To get started with C programming, you can install a C compiler (such as GCC or Clang) on your computer and start exploring basic syntax, data types, control structures, and functions. There are numerous online tutorials, books, and resources available to learn C programming effectively.

Remember to practice writing code, experiment with examples, and gradually build your understanding of the language. As you gain proficiency, you can explore more advanced topics like pointers, data structures, memory management, and file handling.

C programming can be challenging but rewarding. It equips you with a strong foundation in programming concepts and provides opportunities to work on a wide range of applications, from small projects to large-scale systems.


          KEYWORDS USED IN C

auto, break, case, char,const, continue
default, do, double, else, enum, extern
float, for, goto, if, int, long, register
return, short, signed, sizeof, static
struct, switch, typedef, union, unsigned
void, volatile, while



Description of all Keywords in C



auto
The auto keyword declares automatic variables. For example:
auto int var1;
This statement suggests that var1 is a variable of storage class auto and type int.
Variables declared within function bodies are automatic by default. They are recreated each time a function is executed.
Since automatic variables are local to a function, they are also called local variables. To learn more visit C storage class.



break and continue
The break statement terminates the innermost loop immediately when it's encountered. It's also used to terminate the switch statement.
The continue statement skips the statements after it inside the loop for the iteration.
for (i=1;i<=10;++i){
   if (i==3)
   continue;
   if (i==7)
   break;
   printf("%d ",i);
} 
Output
1 2 4 5 6



switch, case and default
The switch and case statement is used when a block of statements has to be executed among many blocks. For example:
switch(expression)
{
    case '1':
    //some statements to execute when 1
    break;
    case '5':
    //some statements to execute when 5
    break;
    default:
    //some statements to execute when default;
}



char
The char keyword declares a character variable. For example:
char alphabet;
Here, alphabet is a character type variable.



const
An identifier can be declared constant by using the const keyword.
const int a = 5;



do...while
int i;
do 
{
   printf("%d ",i);
   i++;
}
while (i<10)



double and float
Keywords double and float are used for declaring floating type variables. For example:
float number;
double longNumber;



if and else
In C programming, if and else are used to make decisions.
if (i == 1)
   printf("i is 1.")
else
   printf("i is not 1.")
If the value of i is other than 1, the output will be :
i is not 1



enum
Enumeration types are declared in C programming using keyword enum. For example:
enum suit
{
    hearts;
    spades;
    clubs;
    diamonds;
};
Here, an enumerated variable suit is created having tags: hearts, spades, clubs, and diamonds.



extern
The extern keyword declares that a variable or a function has external linkage outside of the file it is declared.



for
There are three types of loops in C programming. The for loop is written in C programming using the keyword for. For example:
for (i=0; i< 9;++i){
  printf("%d ",i);
}
Output
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8



goto
The goto statement is used to transfer control of the program to the specified label. For example:
for(i=1; i<5; ++i)
{
    if (i==10)
    goto error;
}
printf("i is not 10");
error:
    printf("Error, count cannot be 10.");
Output
Error, count cannot be 10.



int
The int keyword is used to declare integer type variables. For example:
int count;
Here, count is an integer variable.



short, long, signed and unsigned
The short, long, signed and unsigned keywords are type modifiers that alter the meaning of a base data type to yield a new type.
short int smallInteger;
long int bigInteger;
signed int normalInteger;
unsigned int positiveInteger;



Range of int type data types
			Data types
				Range
			short int
				-32768 to 32767
			long int
				-2147483648 to 214743648
			signed int
				-32768 to 32767
			unsigned int
				0 to 65535



return
The return keyword terminates the function and returns the value.
int func() {
    int b = 5;
    return b;
}
This function func() returns 5 to the calling function.



sizeof
The sizeof keyword evaluates the size of data (a variable or a constant).
#include <stdio.h>
int main()
{
    printf("%u bytes.",sizeof(char));
}
Output
1 bytes.



register
The register keyword creates register variables which are much faster than normal variables.
register int var1;



static
The static keyword creates a static variable. The value of the static variables persists until the end of the program. For example:
static int var;



struct
The struct keyword is used for declaring a structure. A structure can hold variables of different types under a single name.
struct student{
    char name[80];
     float marks;
     int age;
}s1, s2;



typedef
The typedef keyword is used to explicitly associate a type with an identifier.
typedef float kg;
kg bear, tiger;



union
A union is used for grouping different types of variables under a single name.
union student {
    char name[80];
    float marks;
    int age;
}



void
The void keyword meaning nothing or no value.
void testFunction(int a) {
  .....
}
Here, the testFunction() function cannot return a value because its return type is void.



volatile
The volatile keyword is used for creating volatile objects. A volatile object can be modified in an unspecified way by the hardware.
const volatile number
Here, number is a volatile object.